                             Extending remctl

Introduction

    This is a guide for users and implementors of remctl who notice
    features or support currently missing and want to see how to add it,
    or who are curious which parts of remctl can be easily extended and
    which parts are more difficult.  Most of the easy extensibility is on
    the server, which is written to permit straightforward addition of new
    features, particularly to the configuration and ACL files.

    Extension areas are presented here in roughly the order of complexity
    of additions.

    If you're considering extending remctl, please feel free to contact me
    at rra@stanford.edu and let me know what you're planning and what
    problem you're trying to solve.  I'm generally happy to offer advice
    and incorporate and maintain extensions in the base distribution, even
    if they're optional features that require external libraries to build.

ACL Methods

    remctl currently supports four ACL methods, but there is support in
    the ACL syntax for tagging an ACL with a new method and it's
    relatively straightforward to add new ACL methods to the server.

    An ACL method name may be any alphanumerics plus hyphen (-).  The
    current methods are defined in server/config.c (but may be broken int
    a separate file if many more ACL methods are added).  The methods
    struct defined in that file associates method names with the function
    implementing that method.

    To add a new ACL method, first write a function that checks a given
    user against an ACL of that method.  Your function must take four
    arguments: the remote username as a string, the ACL data as a string
    (this is the part after the colon in the ACL for the current command),
    and the file and line number in the ACL for error reporting.  The
    function must return CONFIG_SUCCESS if the user is authorized by that
    ACL data, CONFIG_NOMATCH if they are not, and CONFIG_ERROR on some
    sort of failure, such as failure of a remote service or a syntax error
    in the ACL data.

    For example, the standard acl_check_princ function which implements
    the princ ACL method does a string comparison of the ACL data to the
    remote user identity and returns CONFIG_SUCCESS if they match and
    CONFIG_NOMATCH otherwise.

    Once you've written that function, add it and its method name to the
    methods struct definition in server/config.c.  That's all there is to
    it (although if you're submitting it for inclusion into remctl,
    documentation additions to docs/remctld.pod and either a new test
    suite or an addition to tests/server/acl-t.c would be nice).

Config Options

    remctld configuration options are handled somewhat similarly to ACLs,
    but implementing them is likely to require more work since most new
    options will not be as self-contained in only one portion of remctld.
    But apart from implementing the effects of the option, adding a new
    option is straightforward.

    An option name must begin with a letter and may contain any
    alphanumerics plus hyphen (-).  All options must have a value, and
    options are always written in the configuration file as
    <option>=<value>, after the command and before any ACLs.  Boolean
    options should interpret "yes", "on", "true", and "1" as turning them
    on and "no", "off", "false", and "0" as turning them off.

    To add a new option, first write a parser for it in server/config.c.
    That function should have a name starting with option_ and will take a
    pointer to the configuration line, the value of the option as a
    string, and the name and line number of the configuration file for
    error reporting.  It should return CONFIG_SUCCESS on successful
    parsing and CONFIG_ERROR on any error to parse (such as a syntax
    error).

    What the function does is up to you, but normally configuration
    options will add an additional member to the confline struct and the
    parser should analyze the value of the option and add the appropriate
    parsed information to the confline struct.  Then, elsewhere (usually
    in server/command.c), once the command being run has been determined,
    that data can be used to do whatever the option is supposed to do.
    The members of the confline struct are defined in server/internal.h.

    As with ACL methods, if you submit the new option for inclusion,
    documentation for docs/remctld.pod and either a new test case or an
    addition to an existing test case are appreciated.  (If you don't
    write them, I'll have to in order to incorporate the code.)

Client Library

    The main way in which people have wanted to enhance the client library
    is to add bindings for additional programming languages.  remctl now
    supports Perl, PHP, and Python, as well as a separate implementation
    in Java, but there are many other languages that could be added (Ruby,
    for example).

    I'm happy to include new language bindings in the main remctl
    distribution, and will also try to do the work to build packages for
    Debian and Ubuntu.  Please follow the following guidelines for adding
    new language bindings:

    * Bindings for the C library rather than a native reimplementation in
      that language is preferred.  Java is something of a special
      exception in that it's expected to run without external
      dependencies, but additional protocol implementations make for more
      maintenance work in the long run.  If there are problems with the C
      interface that prevent you from using the C libraries, talk to me
      and I'll try to help.

    * While the interface should adjust for the language, please try to
      keep both the terminology and basics of the interface relatively
      consistent with the C library.  Specifically, there should probably
      be a simple interface that runs a command and returns the result as
      an object or hash, and a more complex interface that permits sending
      multiple commands and reading the individual output, status, or
      error tokens from the server.

    * The C interface allows optional parameters to remctl and remctl_open
      and defaults to trying particular port numbers and principals for
      the server.  Please preserve these optional parameters and defaults
      in the language bindings.

    * Please use the "native" way the language provides to write bindings.
      In particular, please don't use SWIG unless that's what the language
      community actively recommends.

    * Please include a test suite in the native module testing mechanism
      used by that language.

    * Language bindings should be optional and not built by default.  They
      should be enabled with a --enable-<lauguage> flag to configure.  See
      the existing configure logic for the languages already supported and
      the Makefile.am code for doing optional builds for examples.

    * The build must support building in a directory other than the source
      directory with the source files set read-only.  This may mean that
      you need to copy some files from the source directory to the build
      directory if builddir != srcdir, since most language build systems
      don't support VPATH builds.  See Makefile.am for how that's handled
      for existing languages and copy that setup.

    * Please include a README or some other documentation for users of
      that language explaining the complete interface.  php/README and
      python/README are good examples.

Protocol

    The remctl protocol is designed to be extensible by introducing a new
    protocol version.  All commands come tagged with the protocol version
    required to understand them, and the server will automatically reject,
    with a version error, protocol commands with too high of a version.
    The client can also ask the server what version it supports.

    Currently, the protocol version is two.  An initial draft of the
    changes for protocol version three is available in docs/protocol-v3,
    but may change prior to implementation.

    The remctl protocol is defined by docs/protocol.xml, which is
    translated into docs/protocol.txt and docs/protocl.html by xml2rfc.
    Any changes to the protocol should be documented here.

    I would like to keep remctl interoperable, so please talk to me before
    making changes that would modify the protocol.
