                     remctl Streaming Protocol Draft

Introduction

    This is a draft of what would become version three of the remctl
    protocol.  It adds optional support for bidirectional streaming,
    allowing the server and client to exchange arbitrary unsequenced data
    while a command is running with coordinated termination of the
    command.

    This draft should not be used for implementation yet.  The details of
    the protocol may change substantially before it is added to remctl.

    Client library API changes are not discussed in this draft, only
    protocol issues.

Streaming Overview

    A streaming command is a client-initiated operation.  The client
    requests streaming when it sends the command.  The server either
    accepts that request or rejects it.  If a particular command requires
    streaming, the server may reject a non-streaming version of that
    command.

    Once the server accepts the streaming command, it runs the command,
    passing as arguments the arguments provided in the initial command
    token as before.  From that point on, all command output is
    immediately sent back to the client, and the client may also send
    data at any time which is passed as input to the command.  This
    continues without ordering and sequencing until one side or the other
    wants to start shutting things down.

    The server can indicate the end of an output stream with a token
    dedicated to that purpose.  This communicates an EOF on that stream to
    the client without terminating the command processing.  The client can
    similarly tell the server that it is done providing input tokens by
    sending an end of stream token to the server, after which it is not
    permitted to send any more input tokens until the server indicates the
    command is finished.

    When the command is over, the server sends a token indicating that
    fact.  This token will also include the exit status of the command.
    This token implies end of stream on all output streams.  The server is
    solely responsible for determining when the command is over.  The most
    the client can do is indicate the end of the input stream, but it must
    still wait for the server to indicate the end of the command.

    If the server indicates the end of the command before the client
    closes the input stream, the server will continue to consume and
    discard input tokens from the client until the client sends an end of
    stream token.

    There are therefore two ways for a streaming command to end:

    * Client sends end of stream token.  Server sends end of streaming
      command token, possibly preceeded by an arbitrary number of
      streaming output or end of stream tokens.

    * Server sends end of streaming command token.  Client sends end of
      stream token, possibly preceeded by an arbitrary number of streaming
      input tokens.

    The streaming command is not over until the server has sent an end of
    command token and the client has sent an end of input stream token.
    Only after both of those tokens have been sent do both sides return to
    normal processing of remctl commands.

New Tokens

  MESSAGE_COMMAND_STREAM

    Identical to MESSAGE_COMMAND but starts a streaming command instead of
    a regular command.  A separate token is used for this purpose to avoid
    changing the format of the MESSAGE_COMMAND token to add an additional
    flag.

  MESSAGE_STREAM_DATA

    Used by both the client and the server to send data during a streaming
    command.  The format is the same as a MESSAGE_OUTPUT token.  For
    tokens from the client, the stream is required to be 1.  Other streams
    are reserved for future versions of the protocol.

  MESSAGE_STREAM_END

    Indicates an end of data on a stream, equivalent to an EOF condition.
    The only content of this token is the stream number.  After this token
    is sent, no further MESSAGE_STREAM_DATA tokens with that stream number
    will be sent as part of this command.  When sent by the client, this
    indicates the end of streaming data from the client and promises that
    the client will send no further data until the server sends the end of
    command token.

  MESSAGE_COMMAND_END

    Indicates the end of a streaming command.  The format is identical to
    the MESSAGE_STATUS token.  A separate token is used rather than
    reusing the MESSAGE_STATUS token only because the expected client
    response is different (the client may need to send a final
    MESSAGE_STREAM_END token) and it may be useful for the client to
    easily distinguish.

Implementation Issues

    The remctl server will be responsible for translating the network
    packets from the client into data on standard input for the command
    and output from the command into network packets.  To do so safely
    without making assumptions about ordering of data, it will need to
    poll the running command and the client network connection and do
    non-blocking reads and writes.  However, it may need to block the
    client until the command can process data, or block the command while
    waiting for client data.

    I think the best way of handling this is to add buffering code to the
    server with an upper limit on the allowed amount of data buffering.
    The remctl server will then accept data from either the command or the
    client up to the buffer size even if it can't yet write that data to
    its destination.  Once the buffer is full, the server will stop
    polling that connection until the buffer has been drained, forcing the
    other end of that connection to block.

    One challenge for such buffering is that the amount of data contained
    in a single GSS-API token may vary, and ideally the server should not
    partially consume that data.  If the server accepts a token, it should
    read the entire token.  This is not strictly necessary, but I think
    partially consuming an output token would significantly increase the
    risk of deadlock.

Limitations

    This protocol does not address deadlock and instead requires that the
    client and server be aware of deadlock issues and find ways of
    avoiding deadlock within the implementation of a streaming command.
